_ N L/ VR, H R . e— — . a— —— i —

WELFARE ECONOMICS

A consumer is at equilibrium when he gets maximum satisfacion. A consumer gets
maximum satisfaction when he equates the marginal utility denived from his consumption with the
price of the commodity he consumed, or when the marginal utihities derived from two commodities
are cqual or the marginal rate of substitution between two goods is equal to their price ratio.
Gererally economists hold the view that when one’s sausfacuon increases, he 1s at a better welfare
position than before. But the next question arises, as to the level of producuon or distnbution or
consumption, at which the whole society’s welfare 1s better-off. We have discussed in the exchange
chapter that perfectly competitive market situation is good for the society. The society 1s i a better
position if the output is maximum. But, to certain economists, if a policy brings more benefit 1o the
society, then the society will be better-off in terms of welfare. It is only in the last quarter of the
nineteenth century, economists began to disinguish between economic theory and policy. It 1s also
said that the happiness is the maximum when we are able to enjoy maximum satisfaction from zny
activity, including consumption. Welfare is more in a state of affair in comparison with another state
of affair and vice versa. The state of affair, which yields maximum welfare,"1s 2ccepted znd
implemented by the authority for the best advantage of the society.

Welfare economics is, thus, concemned with the evaluation of alternative economic situations.
It is good for the society trying to reach the maximum well-being it can reach with the given factor
endowments-and the state of technology. For-example, if there are two alternatives A & B to a . -
particular factor endowment and if B'can yi€ld more Well-being than A, then 1t wi!l be good Yor the
society to accept the B alternative and edopt it. To evaluate alternative economic situztions, a pumber of
criteria have been developed by vanous cconomists like Pigou, Parc!o Kaldos, chks, Scitovsky, - -
Bergson, Samuelson, Arrow and szls. e e :

Scanned with CamScanner
AW\ LY

Welfare Economics = . 257

examples of external diseconomies. But, the presence of public parks, street hghts and public roads are
good examples of external economies. Externalitics, thus, exist when the mreans that influchee the gain or
cost are not marketable. These means are called untraded interdependencies, which may be unidirectional
or reciprocal. Hence, we can infer that externahties are market imperfectuons, where the market offers no
price for the benefit or cost or for the service or disservice.  As there is market fatlure, t leads to
misallocation of resources and thereby a situation where social well-being i1s not maximused.

Externalities or the divergence between private and social cost and return are due to external
economies i production. and in consumption, external discconomies in  production and
consumption and the presence of public goods. Production and consumpuon of certain goods may
result in an increase 1n welfare 1 comparison with the production cost or private cost. For example, 1if
neighbours are allowed to see programmes in a TV purchased by an individual household then the
total gain will be more than the pnivate cost. This 1s sumilar to production of lead-free petrol, which
mcreases the overall benefits to the society. But, production and consumption of cigarettes cause a
serious health problem and so the social cost is more than the individual cost or production cost.

An improvement in social welfare takes place when the goods, which provide more social gains
than private costs are produced more, at the expense of goods, which are having high diseconomies, and the
poor are allowed to enjoy more share of the income than before. For example, construction of roads and
rmigation facibuies in rural areas at the expense of production of unwanted goods or goods with high
disexternalities is an improvement n the welfare of the rural mass. The next question to be answered 1S
how it can be achieved. There are many ways to achieve this. Taxes may be imposed on goods, which
have high diseconomues, and the tax money can be used for other social welfure programmes. High tax
will certainly reduce the attraction of investmment in these types of goods. Thereby, the output of such types
of goods can be reduced. Subsidy can also be provided to the producers of goods, which give more social
benefits than private costs. It will favour an increase in the output of such commodities. Public goods can
be supplied through public authonty and peopiec may be allowed to share the costs. Intermalising of
externalities is another source to attain market perfection. Internalisation means inclusion of social cost in
the producuon costprivate cost. When ownership nghts are well-defined, there is good chance for
attaining market perfection (Coase Theorem).

7.1.4 Pigou’s Ideal Output and Social Welfare

Ideal output refers to that leve! of output at
which the social welfare is maximum. Generally, the
ideal output is reached automatcally under perfect
competition. A firm is called optimum firm when its
output is at the minimum average cost. - When the
product transformation curve is introduced, the iso-
revenue curve .is tangent to the product .
transformation these have been discussed
. But, now, it is
nce curve and
output for the
by Baumol,
e is available,

-_G-dx

Figure 7.1 .

VoV oV o0 o g

9

2L 22 PPPPT TR0 G U D OC

/A

Scanned with CamScanner
WD U @ O T O O T ——

r

256 Advanced Microeconomics

7.1 Pigovian Welfare Economics

The gist of welfare economics is contained in the standard work of A.C. Pigou, — ‘The
Economics of Welfare’. A.C. Pigou is considered as the father of welfare economics. His views were
first expressed in his book ‘Wealth and Welfare’ (1912). But, his entire views were explained in his
book ‘The Economics of Welfare® (1932) and it is known as the Pigovian neo-classical welfare
economics. The Pigovian Welfare economics can be discussed in the following lines.

7.1.1 Meaning of Welfare

Pigou’s approach to welfare economics is very pragmatic. To him, welfare depends upon
one’s state of mind regarding the satisfaction or utilities received from his consumption. Individuals’
welfare is determined on the basis of the extent to which an individual’s wants are satisfied. He limits
his explanation only to that part of social welfare that can be brought directly or indirectly into
relationship with the measuring rod of money. This is called economic welfare, i.e., welfare or
satisfaction denved by an individual from the use of exchangeable goods and services. It means that
he talks only about economic welfare. And so he says economic welfare is a part of total or general
welfare and is a function of goods and their relative prices. Social welfare is calculated simply by
summing up all individuals® welfare. But, he has failed to take into account other forms of welfare,

which depends on many other elements like the working condition, security, housing status and
human relationship.

7.1.2 Welfare Conditions

Pigou adopts a dual criteria for judging the changes happening in the social welfare. They are
called dual conditions for maximum social welfare. They are as follows:

(i) Maximisation of national income: According to Pigou, if national income increases

without a corresponding change in the supply of factors, then there will be an increasce
in the social welfare.

(i1) Transfer of national income from the rich to the poor: Welfare is maximum when

the share of the poor increases without affecting adversely the total income or the given
national income.

The second welfare criterion is based on the dual, Pigovian postulates of *equal capacity for
satisfaction’ and diminishing marginal utility of income. In short, he assumes that people receive
cqual satisfaction from equal real income and comparatively rich people have less capacity for

enjoyment when compared to the poor. Therefore, every transfer in favour of the poor will add
welfare to the existing well-being.

._Ex(ernalities

hll pomts out that maximum welfan: is not aclucvablc because of market failure. The m:

Scanned with CamScanner

Welfare Economics . a ] 257

examples of external diseconomies. But, the presence of public parks, street lights and public roads are
good examples of external economies. Externalities, thus, exist when the means that influehce the gain or
cost are not marketable. These means are called untraded interdependencies, which may be unidirectional
or reciprocal. Hence, we can infer that externalities are market imperfections, where the market offers no
price for the benefit or cost or for the service or disservice. As there is market fatlure, it leads to
misallocation of resources and thereby a situation where social well-being 1s not maximised.

Externalities or the divergence between privare and social cost and return are due to u(ﬂ'nfl'
economies in production and in consumption, external diseconomies in production and 10
consumption and the presence of public goods. Production and consumption of certain goods may
result in an increase in welfare in comparison with the production cost or private cost. For example, if
neighbours are allowed to see programmes in a TV purchased by an individual household then the
total gain will be more than the private cost. This 1s sumular to production of lead-free petrol, which
increases the overall benefits to the society.  But, production and consumption of cigarettes cause @
serious health problem and so the social cost is mere than the individual cost or production cost.

An improvement in socral weltare takes place when the goods, which provide more social gains
than private costs are produced more, at the expense of goods, which are having high diseconormes, and lh;
poor are allowed to enjoy more share of the income than before. For example, construction of qudS an
imgation facilities in rural arcas at the expense of production of unwanted goods or goods with high
disexternalities 1s an improvement in the welfare of the rural mass. The next queston to be answered 15
how 1t can be achieved. There are many ways 1o achieve this. Taxes muy be mmposed on goods.. wh
have high diseconomies, and the tax moncy can be used for other social welfare programmes. High @ax
will certainly reduce the attraction of investment in these types of goods. Thereby, the output of such types
of goods can be reduced. Subsidy can also be provided to the producers of goods, which grve more -
benefits than private costs. It will favour an increase in the output of such commodities. Public goods m“:_
be supplied through public authority and people may be allowed to share the costs. Internalising ©
externalities is another source to attain market perfecton. Internalisation means inclusion of social cost m

~ the production costprivate cost. When ownership nghts are well-defined, there is good chance
attaining market perfection (Coase Theorem).

7.1.4 Pigou’s Ideal Output and Social Welfare

Ideal output refers to that level of output at
which the social welfare is maximum. Generlly, the
ideal output is reached automaucally under perfect
iti firm is called optimum firm when its
cost. - When the
| introduced, the iso-
the product .
e been discussed
it, now, it s
curve and
utput for the

Scanned with CamScanner
Vodblblbéoeedeeis

¢
PSS

T "l AAMIL/L/ T AMMBY I 4 W

o
258 Advanced Microeconomics
“ondition 1s 2ttamed only when all these three lines/curves are tangent. 1t is noted that the ideal output
5t level of output at which no reallocation of the economy’s resources among various uses would
make the society better off than before. This situation is explamned with the help of a figure, figure

71

In figure 7.1, I,, 1, and I, represent community indifference curves. PL is the price line and

TP 13 the product transformation line. The 1deal output is reached at the point E, where IC, is tangent

to both PL (price line) and TP (product transformation line) lines. In other words, at point E, MRPTyy
‘)

- lT = MRS,,. It s so only when there are no externalities. If there are externalities, then 1t is not
y

possible 1o reach the point E. It is possible to reach either ‘A’ or ‘B’ depending upon, whiCh
commodity comes under extermalities.  If *X” 1s under external economies, then A 1s the equilibrium
pownt It is to the left of E and indifference curve is lower or to the lefl of I,. [t means lower welfare.
1f Y s under external econormues, then B 1s the equilibrium point. However, it is noted that in the first

situation, less quantity of X 1s produced whereas in the second situation, less quantity of Y 1s produced
than the ideal level.

7.2 Pareto’s Optimal Condition or the Pareto Optimality Criterion

The Italian economist Vilfredo Pareto, a disciple of Leon Walras, has given the most
mnocuous value systerm. in which economic efficiency can be objectively measured. This criterion 1S
otherwise called Pareto unanimity criterion or Pareto unanimity rule or Pareto criterion or Paret®
opumality. According to this cntenon, any change that makes at least one person better-off’ and no
one worse-off 1s an improvement in social welfare. But, a change that makes no one better-ofl and at
least one worse-off 1s a decrease in social welfare. In other words, when reallocation of resources 1S
made, if there 15 a possibility for an individual to increase his welfare without affecting anyone, then
the situation after reallocation is better than the situation before reallocation It may be explained 1n 3
different way also. By Pareto optimality we mean a situation in which no one can be made betlcr-o_ff
without making some one worse-off. It is the optimal situation and any shift or movement from this
Situation s not optimal This situation is said to be Pareto-optimal or Pareto-efficient condition.

To attain this Pareto—efficient situation in an economy, three marginal conditions have to be
satisfied They are as follows

(1) Efficiency of distnbution of commodities among consumers (consumption efficiency),
(1) Efficiency in the allocation of factors among firms (production efTiciency), and

(11) Efficiency in allocation of factors among commodities (efficiency in the product-mix oOf
composition of output)

7.2.1  Consumption Efficiency or Efficiency of Distribution of Commoditics among

Consumers

Consumption efficiency requires that it is impossible by a redistribution of a given sct of
Foods to mcreass the utility of one individual without reducing utihty of the other. It is easy 10
€xanune a community of two people. A & B who consume two commoditics, water (X) and 2
Coe e ot all other poods (Y) In response to a drought in their economy in md 2010s, the
2uthodty sancunces water raboming Initial consumption of A’ and *B’ was different. Now they
Lave been aliotted equal amewnts of water and 1t is assured that there is no sale of water between

Scanned with CamScanner
= S a B YO 00/ // /I %4

Welfare Economics . . 259

individuals to avoid profiteenng. Edgeworth Box of Exchange
This situation 1s not optimal as
some reallocation or changes in
policy improves onc of the two 'Y S a4 \ I TSN A 'S
persons without affecting the other.
The details arc given n the 1 ID, d
following figure 7.2

The box figure 7.2 is the  Goods
Edgeworth's box diagram, used for
explaining exchange between two 1 1A,
indsviduals. A's nitial
consumpuion, (before the
mtroductuion of water rationing), of
all other goods is Oa and B's s 0o'b.

‘ Now, due to the drought n their o
economy, water rationing 1s Water (In litres)

introduced and no transfer of water

or sale of water is allowed 1n the Figure 7.2

system. Point “h’, n the figure,

indicates the resulting allocation.

The point 1s half way between point a and b and so it 1s easy to infer that each one is allocated equal
amount of water. It 1s very important to note that the point ‘h’, 1s not on the contract curve. Contract
curve refers to the curve joining all the tangency points between two indifference curves. It is the
locus of Pareto-optimal or efficient distribution of goods between consumérs. Moving up or night
means that A 1s better-off and moving down means B 1s better-off. Any point on the contract curve s
better than any point off the curve. Only on the contract curve, the condition for equilibrium, ie.,

Afl Other ""T"
1

MRSQY = MRS% is satisfied. The point ‘h’ is not on the contract curve. It means that there is a

possibility for improvement in welfare. Allowing trade would enable one or both of the two
individuals to be better-oft without any one being made worse-off. For example, if B.is allowed to
sell ‘mn’ litres of water to A, in return for *hm’ units of all other goods, they, both would be happier,
1.e., both A and B move from their ongmal indifference curves, I.o and Igo to a higher position at point
n where I4, 1s tangent to ly,. It is very cledr that from the explanation that allowing people (o sell
waler 1s beneficial to both persons — the seller and the buyer. If they are allowed to reach the pownt I,
then B is much benefited at the cost of A and so it is not acceptable 1o A. Hence, movement n
between point p and q are better welfare points than before .

7.2.2 Production Efficicncy or Efficiency of Allocation of Factors among Firms .

The consumption efficiency, discussed above, assumes that the commodities are fixed in
supply. Here also, it is assumed that the quantities of the inputs devoled to the production of each
commodity are fixed. Production efficiency requires that production reaches a level where 1t 1s not
possible by a reallocation of factors Yo produce more, than changmg the combination of total output. .
By reallocation of inputs, the combination of total output can be changed But not the total output. The
argument is closcly analogous to the onc uscd for the analysts of consumption efficiency In
consumption clficiency, 1t 1s necessary to.equate the marginal rate of substitution between X-und Y
goods of A with that of B. la the same way for attaining producton efficiency, § 1s necessary ta attaud -

a siuation where the marginal rate of teckmical substitution between two factors, 1. and K.of X

T e

Scanned with CamScanner
'1.’, L)
$1..

-
8 3

nwer-ron

260 Advanced Mlcroeconomlics

commodity must be equal to that of Y commodity. To explain this puint, we use the same ldgeworth

box figure, two iaputs, K and L and two commodities X and Y. ‘The production efliciency can easily
be explamed with the help of figure 7.3,

As discussed in the previous section, only points on the contract curve are Parcto-efficient.
Hence, it s clear from figure 7.3, that point NI s not optimal or ineflicicnt  Point NE is incflicient
because a reallocation of the given K and L. between X and Y goods, any point from a (o ¢ inclusive,
leads to an increase in at least one commuodity without a reduction in the other.  For example, a
movement from NE to point ‘a® means an Labour (L) Fdgewarth Box of Production o'
crease i the production of Y goods. The . K
firm producing Y commodity moves from Iy, '.\_IJ WNE e anfle ol
w Ly a higher ssoquant.  The point NE .
indicates no exchange position or position
before reallocaton But, if they move from
NE to ‘¢’ then firm producing X commodity
increases its output without affecting the Copital Iy Capital
output of Y. On the other hand, if they are » ! X | ®
able to move to point b, both firms Iy,
are  benefited. However, it is noted
that any point on the contract
curve satisfies the optimality condition.

i e.MRTS{k =MRTSYk. It means that
the marginal rate of technical substitution [ — L
between labour and capital of X firm must be Labour (L)

equal to the marginal rate of technical

substitution between labour and capital of Y Figure 7.3

firm. But, it should be noted that before the

reallocation, NE is the point i1.e., X is in Ixo

and Y is in Iy, and so they are not ready to move down from the point NE but ready to move up from

this point. Hence, any point between a and c inclusive is acceptable to both the firms X and Y,
depending on the bargaining power of individual firms.

1y, 3 e

I,

7.23 Combining Consumpuon Efficiency and Production Efficiency or Efficiency
in Product-mix or Eﬂ'clency in the Composition of OQutput

The third possible way to maximise welfare is by changing the product-mix. When it is
possible to maximise social welfare by merely changing the product-mix, then it is conducive to the
whole socicty. The third marginal condition to reach maximum welfare is that the slope of the
production possibility curve must be equal to the slope of the exchange curve. The slope of the
production possibility curve (PPC) is called the marginal rate of product transformation curve between
two goods X and Y (MRPTxy). The slope of the exchange curve is called the marginal rate of
substitution between two goods X and Y. Symbolically,

MRPTxy = MRS%, = MRSE,

It is very clear from the above formula that the marginal condition for a Parcto-optimal
composition of output requires that the MRPT between any two goods must be equal to the MRS

Scanned with CamScanner

PRTRRY pan

T . e, WA T, W W, BT m
WwWelfare Fconomics 201

between the same goods, Like the other two marginal conditions, thus condition 15 8lso illustrated with
the help of a figure 74

As 1t 13 discussed in figure |1, production at any v4
point inmide (he PPC is inefficient and only on the
PPC it is efficient. When we combine production
and consumption, Pareto-optimal -critenion would
refer 10 a snuanon where 1t 13 pot posable to

increasc the welfarc of one individual without
reducing the welfare of any other individual, by
producing more of one good and less of another

Cand ¥
good by reallocating resources. In figure 7.4, PT

curve indicates the cconomy’s PPC and | curves
represent  the  welfare  of the economy by

indifference curves, Iy, 1) & I;. The point E in the
figure 7 4 represents Parcto-optimal state from the
view point of both production and consumption.
But, the other points A, B and C arc not optimal Gond X
from the point of view of the econormy as a whole,

because as 1t 1s smd, the point C 13 inside the PT : Fipure: i 4 s"&

curve and points A and B are related to a low indifference curve, where the slopes are not egual
Further, it is obvious that movement from A to E or B to E increases the welfare of the economy a3 2 )

whole. At the point E the marginal condition that MRPTxy = NTRS,(Ay = MRSE?y is satisfied (

Though point D is at a still higher social indifference curve, I, that point 15 not atainable for the given 6“\
resources. The maximum reachable points are indicated by the product transformaton curve PT. '
Hence, E represents Parcto-opumality from the point of view of the economy as a whole. This gy
condition must be fulfilled for each commodity both in production and in consumption. Ia the '
problem of distribution of goods or exchange, the condition is that MRS, , must be equal for every e
consumer and in the problem of allocation of inputs in prodaction, the condition is that MRTS, « must ‘
be equalised in the production of each commodity. But for the production of an optimal product-mix,

& 4

X W

&S e

Tf?‘

MRS in consumption must be equal to MRTS in production. ;-r-
7.3 Value Judgement , ' -
Value judgement literally means subjective estimation. Simply, we can say vatue juﬁgem:m '

is some cthical belief and judging a situation or a state of affairs on the basis of the ethical belief. All

cthical statements recommending, influencing or persuading are simply called value statements or“'-.
judgements. They, generally, describe the facts in an emotive way and tend to influence people by ~

simply altering their attitudes. As value judgements descnibé facts, but are prescriptive in nature, ll*zy”_a

are, hence, qualitative statements. To attain the optimum position, every individual acts 235 the best W
judge of his welfare. To reduce or avoid smoking, recently, the government of India has passed an
Anti-smoking Act. But, from the point of view of smokers, their satisfaction is reduced by this Act.

But, ethically and from the governmeny's and the society’s point of view it is avery good step. From

the point of society, the governmem likes to kave a conducive environment ‘in placgs where pco;:!g~
gather. Terms like poverty, eradication and inequality reduction are ‘good examples of value

judgements. They increase the economic welfare or »\clfare of thg wholc soci¢ty, Hence, n c..n be

Scanned with CamScanner
262 Advanced Microeconomlics

conclhuded that wellare proposiions mvolve value judgements. In other words, welfare economics
mvolves value judgements and therehy interpersonal comparisons.

Fconomiets differ in thewr ideas over this 1ssue. The important questions that anise are, should
cconormists make use of valun judgements in welfare economica? and whether it is possible to measure
welfare without doing interpersonal comparisons?

It 15 generally accopted (hat as welfare 15 an ethical term, all welfare propositions arc
ethical and involve value judgements For example, terms such as soclal, community, national,
gatisfaction and unlity are highly emotive and 80 economics 15 not free from value judgements, As

welfare economics 15 concerned with pohicy measures, 1t involves cthical terminology such as social
wellare, social beneflit and social edvantage.

The classical economists viewed welfare economics without using any value judgements. For
example, according to classical economists, welfare of a nation varies directly with s level of
production But, the neo-clarsical econormists like Marshall are concerned with the cardinal
measurement of unlity and they think that interpersonal companson of utility 15 incvitable  Pigovian
welfare economics 1s also based on thus principle But, Robbins in 1932 held the view that there 15 no
necessity for interpersonal comparisons and welfare can be maximised by fulfilling Pareto-optimality
conditions. It means that there 13 no necessity for making interpersonal comparisons 10 maximisc

welfare.  On the basis of this view, Kaldor, Hicks and Scitovsky formulated the compensation

principle

Berpson, on the other hand, points out that the compensation principle itself has involved
some value judgments. According to lum and Samuclson and Arrow, there is no welfare econormnics
and no meaningful welfare proposition can be made without introducing value judgements. According to
them the Pareto’s optimal criteria are not value-free.  Boulding’s view has put an end to this
controversy. According to Boulding, the statement of Parcto that no body should cver be made worsc-ofl
itself involves interpersonal comparisons and so the Parcto-optimality itsclf is a special case of
interpersonal companson for maximising social welfare function. Hence, it is not possible to avoid
interpersonal comparisons in welfare economics.

7.4  Social Welfare Function or The Bergson Criterion

A social welfare function (SWF) 1s simply a rule for measuring aggregate welfare from
individuals’ welfare  So far we have discussed that a change is considered to be good when every one
benefits without hurting any one. But, 1t is impossible to evaluate when a change brings benefits to
some individuals at the cost of some others. In other words, the welfare cniteria so far discussed show
that when a change in the economc policy benefits some persons and hurts some other persons, it is
impossible to evaluate 1t without making some value judgement about the deservingness of the
difterent indhividuals or groups. Abram Bergson has suggested an explicit sct of value judgements in
the form of a social welfare function to measure the welfarc of different individuals and to find out the
net results. A social welfare function 1s analogous to the individual consumer’s utility function. It
provides a ranking of alternative states, in which different individuals enjoy different utility levels. It
tnes to arrive at a social ordering of feasible social states from individuals’ ranking, 1n terms of their
desirability.

The concept of social welfare function was first introduced by Bergson and later on
scientifically developed by Samuelson, Tinter and Arrow. Bergson takes an cconomy consisting of
two individuals and explains the social welfare function by a set of social indifference contours. The

Scanned with CamScanner

- i §F SOVINI | A |
Wellare Fconomlica 18

social indifference contours are not smootl curves ke Yp
the ordinary indifference curves but in meaning (hey uB
aro the eame. A curve is a locus of pointa representing
constant or same socinl utihty or welfare. Purther, like

the ordinary indiflerence curve, the social indiflerence
contour 1o the right side indicates higher wellaro than

the leftward rocial andiflerence comtour Hence, o
change, which could move tho society from a pomt on

the lower indifference contour to a point on the higher
inifference contour increases the social welfare and 1,
vice versa. The detatls are illustrated in the fipure 7.5 1,

As piven in the figure, the social ndifference curves I,

arc not smooth. They have some ups and downs J » X
depending upon the relationship between wellare and UA
utilities of |nd|vuluztl\' A nr‘uI' B To the whole society, Figure 7.5

2 movement from ‘a’ to ‘b’, has no net benelit. In

other words, the movement from ato b or b to a leaves

the level of social welfure unaltered. But, a movement fromatw coratodorbto c or c 1o d 15 an
increase n the social welfare. But, however it 1s very difficult to compare different individuals and
rank them.

7.4.1 Maximisation of Social Welfare or Determination of the Point of Bliss

The point at which the social welfare 13 maximum is called the bliss point. In this section, a
discussion 1s carried out to examine (he conditions of social welfare maximusation. Here, to simplify
the explanation, a two-factor, two-commodity, two-consumer model 15 used  Thus, there are two
factors, Labour, L and Capital, K and their quantities are given. There are only two goods X & Y o
produce (each firm produces only one commodity) and there are only two consumers A and B. The
motive is utiity maximisation for consumers and profit maximisation for producers. There s no
economucs of scale and the utiliues of consumers are independent.

To find out the point of bliss we have to use two curves; viz., (1) social welfare function and
(1) grand utility possibility frontier. The social Y,
welfare functions arc used to find the situaton where
the social welfare 15 maximum. The grand utility
possibility fronuer shows the maximum utility
attainable by B, given the utility enjoyed by A from
any given product-muix, Each point on the PPC gives yp
rise to a utility possibility frontier. The onyelope of
the various utility possibmihity frontiers 15 the grand ug
utility possibtlity frontier of the economy. Maximum
social welfare is attained at o pont whore the grand
utility possibility fronticr curve is tangent to_the

! |

highest possible social welfare function ot =social |

indifference contour. In other words, social _wclﬁlrc is® 0 ll )
maximum at the pomnt of tangency of the envelope uuliry O u} - u' . UKx
possibility frontier w ith the highest possible social .. F -
indifference contour. The tangency poumt i€ ealled the | . Figure 7.6

Scanned with CamScanner
Welfare Econcmics = c 265

sveids makong imter-persomal compensons of wtilty. Most econommc changes are of the type Kaldor-
Hicks visualised and g0 Kazldor-Hicks crenon s pracucally vald g

First we shall explam the Kaldor-Hicks omenon with a2 camencal exampie, thens move 1o
grapkical ilestration. Suppose, there 13 2 Plan to widen the roed m a villege, e progamme wil]
eazble all villagers to emyoy benefes Lke publc tramsport B, 3 few land ocwoers bave to lose some
grea of their land.  The gamers e asked the queshos bow much they are ready (0 pay o caTy-out the
project At the same ime the losers are also asked the question bow much they e ready to pay for
proventmg the project  If they are ready to pay coe lakh ropees aad the villagers are ready © poy
more than oce la2ki rupess, then the Kaidor-Hicks amenon 13 satisfied and 50 the project s usufied.
This crmterion ts (Dustrated with the beip of a figure 7.7

The fizzre 7.7 1s drzwn to explain the change widh two VT
odvidezls A and B a=d two bmadles of commodines, B
X and Y. Tbe two umlty posshiliry carves AB and

amalyss from point a, A's move romatwo bercor
betwesn b 2nd ¢ 1s 2n improvement m social weifare,
satisfymg the Pareto optimainty condmion. Azy pomt

between ¢ 2nd b mclusive represers a change that
benefits aticast one withoot burung the other or

benefits both the individuals The same 1s the result if
verne=t outside band c or b, and ¢ or
v 1 a to 2, or a; to a cannot be evaluated
by the Parctian camtenon beczuse nt improves A's
welfzre or B's welfare zt the expense of Bor A. It can
be evaluaizd in terms of Kaldor-Hicks amterion For Figure 7.7

exampls, if 2 change is planned and there 15 2 move

from 2 © a;, 1t is possible to compare welfare only with the help of Kaldor-Hicks ariterion. b is
ic1al to A 2t the expense of B and so the gain is more than the loss, and then it is an improvement
ifzre. It ts very mteresting to pote that there is a possibility for moving to point . Point
‘a;” 15 benzfical to ‘A’ only under the Kaldor-Hicks condtion that *a,’ (new bundic) mmst be above
the point ‘2’ (1nitial bundle). - . ) .

Thus, Kaldor-Hicks cnitenion satisfied what the Paretian criterion did not satisfy. But it is also
not free from limitztions. It failed to indicate 2 comxnon standard value and income distribution is
completely ignored. This criterion because of its difficulty in zpplication loses its universal validity.
Further, it talks about only potential compensation but nqt actual compensation. - .

752 Scitovsky Criterion - )

It was Tibor Scitovsky (1941) who pointed cut the limitations of the Kaldor-Hicks criterion.
He pointed out that the Kaldor-Hicks crisenion leads to a contradiction. As given in figure 7.7, 2
movement from ‘a’ to *a,” is an imprbvement, satisfying 't Kaldor-Hicks criterion. But, the counter
move from ‘a,” 10 ‘a’ also passes the Kaldqr-Hicks cniterién and thereby shows an improvement in
social welfare. In such a case, each situation would be better- than the other. This contradiction s -

[ A U A L

overcome this contradiction. Accordm'g.to #is cnterion,’a change is said to increase wekHate if, - .

&?
Se

called Scitovsky paradox. Scrtovsky kas suggested znother cniterion called Scitovsky feversal test to ﬁ*;

Scanned with CamScanner
SN e0% 000 O _Yog 00

264 Advanced Microeconomics

point of bhss. In the figure 7.6 given below, the grand utility possibility frontier is combined with the
social welfare function represented by a number of social indifference contours.

The social welfare 1s maximum at the point E, which s called the point of bliss. The grand utility
curve wu' is the locus of utility combinations which satisfy the marginal condition MRPT = MRS for
each commodity-mix. The slope of this utility frontier must be equal to the slope of the social
mdifference contour. The social indifTerence contour I, is tangent to the grand utility possibility frontier
at the point E where the two slopes are equal.

Now, we shall discuss why Bergson criterion is superior to Pareto optimality. It is first
indicated that Pareto optimality is a necessary condition but not a sufTicient condition for welfare
maximisation All the points on the grand unlity possibility frontier satisfy all the three conditions of
Pareto-optimality.  But, Bergson says only the point E yields maximum social welfare and not all the
pomnts on the uulity fronuer. For example, pomnt € and ¢; are on the utility frontier and so these points
must give maxumum social welfare. But, 1t is not so because at point *d’, the social welfare is more than
at point ¢ and ¢; as point *d’ is on the higher indifference contour. Hence, Pareto optimality is a
necessary condition but not a sufficient condition.

7.5 Compensation Principle or The Kaldor, Hicks and Scitovsky
Compensation Criterion

The compensation criteria were originated to provide a basis for making welfare comparisons
| in situations where some gain and some others lose, when redistribution or reallocation occurs. When
a change occurs 1n an economy and 1n the resultant situation some individuals gain and some others
lose, 1t 1s difficult to find out, whether the benefit is maximised or not. To combat such a stalemate, a
new sct of welfare cntena have been developed by econonmusts like Kaldor, Hicks and Scitovsky. All
the three economusts mentioned above were able to explain maximisation of social welfare, without
making value judgements. Tibor Scitovsky's model is somewhat different from the model developed
by Nicholas Kaldor and John Hicks. But, both the models are based on compensation principle and so
all the models are called in the name of compensation principle.

7.5.1 The Kaldor-Hicks Criterion

|

It is very difficult to bring an economic change, which brings only favourable effects on.
individual welfare. Any policy change aiming at greater economic development and economic 1
welfare has resulted in some disadvantages to atleast a few. If efficiency used by Pareto is the system
of companson of welfare, then there will be no economic policy changes. Hence, a model to measure - |
the net welfare 1s developed by Kaldor and Hicks. The Kaldor-Hicks criterion says that a move from
social state *A’ to another social state ‘B’ 1s considered as an improvement in social welfare, if the
gainers from such a move have some extra gain, after compensating the loss incurred by losers. In
other words, assume that an economic change is contemplated, which will benefit some and hurt
others. Those persons who are benefited by the change are called gainers and persons hurt are losers. |
If the gainers are ready to pay more for carrying out the change than the losers, who are ready to pay
for preventing the change, then the change will constitute an improvement in social welfare because |
the gainers could compensate the losers and still have some net gain. If the gainers can bribe the .
losers for accepning the change, Kaldor-Hicks criterion is met and so the change is justified. Here, it is
assumed that the marginal utility of money remains constant.

<3 Kaldor-Hicks cniterion 1s, thas, applied to a situation. where an economic change benefits
some peopic and hunts others.  In such a sstuatior, the Pareto cnterion cannot be applied since Pareto

L (%6 o VY

Scanned with CamScanner
&

S

L - e
Welfare Economics B el = - 26 A

’_J

avoids making inter-personal comparisons of utility. Most economic changes are of the type Kaldor.
Hicks visualised and so Kaldor-Hicks cniterion is practically vald .

')

First we shall explain the Kaldor-Hicks criterion with a numencal example, then move g
graphical illustration. Suppose, there is a plan to widen the road in a village, the programme wiy; -
cnable all villagers to enjoy benefits like public transport. But, a few land owners have to lose some
arca of their land. The gainers are asked the question how much they are ready to pay to carry-out the
project. At the same time the losers are also asked the question how much they are ready to pay for
preventuing the project. If they arc ready to pay one lakh rupees and the villagers are ready to pay
more than one lakh rupees, then the Kaldor-Hicks cnternion is sausfied and so the project is justfied.
This criterion is illustrated with the help of a figure 7.7

4
)

/

The figure 7.7 1s drawn to explain the change with two ~ Ya
individuals A and B and two bundles of commodities,
X and Y. The two utility possibility curves AB -and
A,B, represent the two bundles of goods. Starting our
analysis from point a, A’s move from a to b or c or
between b and ¢ is an improvement in social welfare,
satisfying the Pareto optimality condition. Any point
between ¢ and b inclusive represents a change that
benefits atleast one without hurting the other or
benefits both the individuals. The same 1s the result if
they move from a, to b, or ¢, or between b, and c;,.
But, any movement outside b and ¢ or b, and ¢, or
movement from a to a, or a, to a cannot be evaluated
by the Paretian criterion because it improves A’s
welfare or B's welfare at the expense of B or A. It can
be evaluated in terms of Kaldor-Hicks criterion. For ) Figure 7.7

example, if a change is planned and there is a move

from a to a,, it is possible to compare welfare only with the help of Kaldor-Hicks criterion. It is
beneficial to A at the expense of B and so the gain is more than the loss, and then it is an improvement
in social welfare. It is very interesting to note that there is a possibility for moving to point d. Point
‘a,” is beneficial to *A’ only under the Kaldor-Hicks condition that *a,” (new bundle) must be above
the point *a’ (initial bundle). S -

’!P»)

iy
‘o a o @

L]

) D
:!
/

]

§ §d 9 o ane

P

Thus, Kaldor-Hicks criterion satisfied what the Paretian criterion did not satisfy. But it is also
not free from limitations. It failed to indicate a common standard value and income distribution. is
completely ignored. This criterion because of its difficulty in application loses its umversal validity.
Further, it talks about only potential compensation but nqt actual compensation. -

7.5.2 Scitovsky Criterion - . .

b P

It was Tibor Scitovsky (1941) who pointed out the limitations of the Kaldor-Hicks criterion. i
He pointed out that the Kaldor-Hicks crijerion leads to a contradiction. As given in figure 7.7, a

movement from ‘a’ to *a,” is an imprbvement, satisfying tife Kaldor-Hicks criterion. But, the counter -
move from *a,” to *a’ also passes the Kaldqr-Hicks criterion and thereby shows an improvement in >

social welfare. In such a case. each situation'would be better- than the other. This contradiction s -
1 called Scitovsky paradox. Scitovsky has suggested another criterion called Scitovsky teversaltestto & -
overcome this contradiction. Accordin'g.to this cnterion,'a change is said to.increase weHare if, " .. =

- o t* 4 . e N

* ) \1 -
3 > 1 > y o —

Scanned with CamScanner
TN WANYRATHN T ALL X P
266
p (1) Kaldor-Hicks criterion is satisfied and

M (i) If the losers are incapable of bnbing the gainers for accepting the change.

. Hence, a movement from point ‘a’ to point ‘¢’ is an improvement because both A and B can
"Y—Q move further to potnt d. At point ‘d’ both are better off than before. But it is not ‘c’ to a;.

Scitovsky, thus, solved the coatradiction of Kaldor-Hicks criterion and took ﬂier:"_’i“:y

" -(,)\ economics to a new height. However, the compensation criterion is concerned with inyu‘: I,:;ativc

aspect of social welfare, at the neglect of equity. The question of equity is concerned with 3 Fails to

40\ preference of individuals in the whole economy. 4ll also leads to a contradictory outcome and | s, it

~ covide any clear ordering of available economic alternatives. Another failure of thls_ model of
P;(uﬂ\t\' constant marginal utility of money. But, it is a well known fact that the marginal utility

'-\D :n;‘.ncy is not constant and so redistribution resulting in inequity cannot be properly measured unless

we know the exact marginal utility of money to different individuals.

Advanced Nllcroecclm"‘“ld

Y 7.6 Inability to Obtain Optimum Welfare

i ﬁ‘) It 1s generally accepted that competitive market leads to an efficient allocation of resou'l'cis:e‘

- a given pont of time. Every competitive equilibrium is Pareto-optimal. It is the first wel ’ws

- theorem called Invisible Hand Theory or Harmony Thesis. The second welfn_re theorem sta o
"%@) that a Parcto optimum allocation of resources can be realised if onc uses a pricing mechanism

fectly competitive markets.  The essential of competitive equilibrium is that at a sel»gf price (P,

) p-. .. P, all markets are simultaneously cleared. Consumers’ and Producers’ equilibriums are

mutually consistent with each other and in aggregate, all markets are cleared. Consumers4m-’-\mﬂ}15"

their satisfaction and producers maximise their profit and at equilibrium their maximising points

"™@ coincide. The maximum happiness point (point of bliss) is reached where slopes of the isoquant, ‘1’}"

indifference cunve, the production possibility curve and the budget line are equalised. To say 10

‘ "\v‘ simple terms, perfect competition can lead to a general equilibrium situation where the three marginal

conditions of Pareto are satisfied. It is worthy to consider the following points here:

w
Y Q (i) Profit maximisation is achieved when the following condition is satisfied, i.e., MRTS.x = T
r‘g for individual firm and for all firms h(RTSZ{K = N[RTSZK =
r
—

| (1) Uulity maximisation is achicved only if and when MRSxy = E. for an individual and for the
-~ y
A B P,
| - whole economy l\iRS" = b(RS“ ==
W Py
; (1i1) At the bliss point, the slope of the production possibility curve is equal to the slope of the
-

indifference curve, i e, MRPT, = —*.

y

(1v) A perfectly competitive market maximises 1ts profit by equalising its marginal cost to the
market price. Thus we have, ) ’ E

o— - .

A 71T Xd W

Scanned with CamScanner
AN YY YW//VAY W A 4 DA

|

Welfare Economics ' 267

From the above analysis, it is inferred that a perfectly competitive system ensures the
attainment of maxaimum welfare. But, if perfect compeurion is absent, then maximum social welfare
will not be achieved. Further, it is also assumed that there is no extemalities, no public goods, no
increasing returns and no difficulty in drviding inputs. Though, for artaining maximum social welfare,
the indifference curves and isoquants must be convex to the ongin and the production possibility
curve is concave to the origin and the demand functions must be continuous as these conditions are
not very important, no separate discussion about these is not carried out here. But the conditions
mentioned first are discussed one by one 10 analysc how the absence of these conditions prevents the
society from reaching the maximum social welfare level.

7.6.1 Market Power or Absence of Perfect Competition

The first welfare theorem holds that all consumers and firms arc only price takers and not
price makers. If some individuals or firms influence the price or are price makers, then there will be
no efficiency in resource allocation. It is because under perfect competiuon the pnice is equal to the
marginal cost. But, a firm with market power may raise the price above the marginal cost by limiting
its output. Market power arises in different contexts. One is monopoly, another is oligopoly and the
other 1s monopolistic competition. Under monopoly, a single firm controls all matters related to
production and selling. It is possible to raise the price above the marginal cost m the less extreme case
of oligopoly. In monopolistic competiive market condition, though many firms produce a particular
commodity, brands of a few companies are considered supenor. For example; in India though a
number of firms produce suiting materials, Raymonds, Gwalior and Vimal are regarded by many
consumers as distinct and so their prices are not equal to the marginal cost. Failure to equate price
with the marginal cost results in inefTicient distribution of commodities, among consumers. The MRS
of different consumers are not equal, the MRPT of different producers are not equal, the marginal
rates of substitution between products and factors are not equal to their marginal rates of
transformation and the pnce ratios of different products and factors are not equal to each other.
Simply, if there is a market power, then Paretian optimum conditions cannot be achieved. A figure
can help one to understand casily these ideas. (See figure 7.1). In the figure 7.1, all the conditions for
maximum social welfare is achicved at the point E, but, points A and B are not opumal points. At
point A, the good X is produced under monopoly condition while good Y is produced under perfectly
competitive condition. But at point B, the good X is produced under perfect competition while the

good Y is produced under monopoly. At point A, MRPTxy is less than / . Atpomt B, MRPT‘y

is more than —= . But consumer equates MRS, With —= . Under ‘A’ situation, comriodity "X is

y Yy
produced under monopoly, MRPTxy< MRSty and under “B” situation, cornmodlry “Y" 15 produced }

*1 ° under monopoly, MRPTxy > MRSxy. T‘hus except point E, all olhcr pobas indicate noa-Tulfilment of -
Parcto optimality. . 5 -

Scanned with CamScanner
268 Advanced Microecono

7.6.2 Externalities

Another requirement for the validity of efficiency condition is that there are no exte
effects in consumption or in production. In other words, neither external economies nor disecona
occur in consumption and in production. By externalities, we mean the presence of certain fac
outside the pricing system, which are not captured by the market process. Externalities are mx
imperfections, where the market offers no price for service or disservice. The presence of extern
_in consumption and production leads to Pareto non-optimality, mal-allocation of resources:
consumption and production, to fall short of Pareto-optimaljty. In short, we can say externalities
to divergence between social costs and social benefits and private costs and private benefits:
condition for Pareto-optimality is that there should not be any divergence between these costs
benefits.

7.6.2.1 Externalities in Consumption 4

‘
EL

It is assumed in perfect competition that utility is independent. In other words, for attais
Pareto-optimality it should be assumed that there is no externalities in consumption. The utility Te

)
—

Consumption of one person affects the utility of others positively or negatively. In consumyp
bandwagon effect and Veblen effect influence considerably the utility of others. Practi¢
speaking, smoking of one person affects the utility of non-smokers. Using un-leaded petrol
maintaining clean environment around one’s house increases the utility of neighbours. Consumpti

r
it
1
:
3
v programmes on that TV. 3
. &
: If there i |s no externalities in consumption, the marginal rate of substitutions will be equali
. MRS*,, = MRS"® xy- 1f externalities are present in consumption, these rates cannot be equalized an: "
N Pareto-optimality cannot be achieved. One can easily understand the above discussed points wit
1 help of the following figure 7.8. N
'r Ya Ya : '3
' (A) \ (B) __ » 4
' .~ 3 1 ?
‘ s, = |
Good Y = Good Y L ;
- -
|
| | L, F
! H >x >x T
o Q, Q " — Q .
Good X Good X 2
Figure 7.8 f— L

To get a clear understanding about external discconomies in consumption it is necessany

have an assumption that consumer A, is not affected by the consumption of B, but A's consump®

- affects the utility of B as A is a smoker. If A increases his consumnption of cigarcttes ‘X, 3 will
unhappy and 1f A decreases, B will be happy. We may take another example, if *A’ consumes n'!-"

o

Scanned with CamScanner
\‘f-re Economics . ’ . ‘ 269

for his house use, it increases the mosquito problem as the_waste water flows into an open
“pround, in which mosquitoes thrive. On the other hand, if he reduces the use of water, the pit will dry
and mosquito problem will be reduced and so B will be happy Whatever may be the example, it is
erred that if the disutility creating consumpnon 1s reduced, then the social welfare will increase. In
% above diagrams, the original positions are ‘a’ for A and ‘b’ for B. If ‘A’ reduces his consumption
O(g to OQ),, then the utdity of B will increasc. Consumner ‘B’ 1s now in a higher indifTerence
e I, , which is an upward shified indifference curve. It means that he gets more satisfaction
wsthout any change in his budget or consumption. He consumes the same old quanuty of OQ, in
nel (B). Though MRSs at a, and b, are not equal, the social welfare increases in the situation
use of the decrease in the consumption of good Y, by consumer A.

3 e

In the same way, in the case of extenal economies in consumption, an increase in
ption of ‘A’ increases the utility enjoyed by ‘B’. For example, if A keeps a light buming in
snt of his house throughout the night 1t will benefit the opposite house owner who has no electricity
anection and the others who use the path passing through (in front of) A’'s house. It can be
xplained by taking a, as the initial position of A and b as the initial position of B in figure 7.8.

2.2 Externalities in- Production

.-.‘ - P ——

' As in consumption, there are two types of externality in production — external economics
d external diseconomies. External economies occurs when productive activities of firms and

{
“ trics benefit other firms and industries for which the contributing firms receive no payment. For
: ple when water 1s pumped out by a coal mine, the cost of pumping water by an adjacent mine is
.‘.. Or a new highway reduces the transport cost of individual firms. As these firms do not pay
& !hxs service, the marginal social cost 1s lower than the private marginal cost and pnvate marginal
ten fit is less than the social marginal benefit. The private marginal cost is lower than the social
: inal cost and pnivate marginal benefit is higher than the social marginal benefit if there are
. al diseconomies in production. For example, the production of alcohol and 1ts cost in terms of
idents and other inconvenience it creates. The private cost, which does not include the social cost

> environmental damages, accidents due to drunken drivers and the inconvenience related to it, is
' s than the social cost, which takes all the social costs hsted above. And so the social benefit is less
han private benefit if there is external diseconomies in production. Here, the marginal social cost
i C) is equal 1o the marginal private cost (MC) plus the marginal extcmnl cost (MEC).
1 bolically,

MSCx = MCx + MECx

The marginal social benefit (MSS) is cqunl to the margmm private benefit (MBy) plus the
ginal external benefit (MEBx).

bolically, , - o .
MSBx = MBx + MEBx
. Now for our discussion, take the pmducuon of unlcadcd petrol for external ‘economies and the

her in this aspect. S

oduction ‘of alcohol for cxternal dlsccqnomles ~ The followmg figure 7.9 cnhgh(cn the readers )

Scanned with CamScanner
Y, //70" 2% o o » @ "R DS

Vielfare Economics . 7271

Ge two firms must be egual It can be casily sdjusted and Ghe total peudact will bz completely
czhausied |f there 3 oomstamt ptarmado-scale. (n the ofher band, both decweazsmg reoams esd
mCreateng returns Create non-ptealey pedlems

Is the case: oA decreasing roarns, e (0t2) prymem made o lower thas Gue total monee of

ezl vilue of capa produced  Is other words, ttal prodect 18 A czhaesed by (actn peymenmd

bus, there 5 a destnbutuonal problem 1 8 goneral epuddres frame work However, o o ot 8
seTioms prodiers bt tegures unly wiyres mathemat sl calodatems as e ERr e rEATe Ty

On the ofhier hand, myreamag rev=ns Vo wale creaes orr only Getrdrsmal proiems b dwo
equzisty probiems berzuse long-rm marpeal om o
product tram
LAC 5 abve |MC ¢
MC the (irm nas v ncw s dwaps B foally wads @ % Gllagnr oA Gn whyde racnm vyses Udess
G boes moared by firms 8 orvered by gorvers

rve o Siow ey everage w@ Durvr wl
< 15 cmver v G origs wmmieed o Urcaie o S on g L3 we kmow, f

L
™ ooy ks The (rm has @ ogpaloze VAL, weali MV and an AL s shove

T tutulars, Sut an FEPS wil 6o Y prsnd M

sbady s given, the govemment will bave W wek o sidovonad wrars of rovemsw v, goy Ge
sbudy PBat, 2 2 cxnpettive marie a s slous umpaciie  Ths stuston leads t© teastusbenoe 40
e Parmtoaptimalay and therelyy, i e overall efficiency

There will be no proviem, f we have an enanporant wcreaseng retsrasAc—wcile
ImCreasing returms W0 scale o suong, the preeun prasdy
pven in ligure 7 10 Howeves, twe) sstations snse, iz

Bz, of e
T (AVPS B

] cawve will b conver

(1) The curvatuse of the communny indiflcsence curve 1 grester Guan e corvatese of the
comver pridbuium porsdyday curve snd

(1) The curvatue of the PPC 13 greater (han the curvaters of the mdaferencs curve,

¥ 4 Ya
1
\ Ay " (5
‘«
i Y i -~ [T
\ o Y ~ | % lseva'lue #retncy
\ \‘ g W\ . Line
v .
O » X /'L -

’ Flgure 7.10

In prarie) (Ay of figure 710, 5. 19 Whe eapushilir turn peort witiers e insrvatue product Lne 134, e
production posaibility carve VI and (b commmnity wdifferenur carve 1o, ste langent  Here, the
azimm social welfare ia no bonget aaur iaded witly mmarurmm vatue of gutpat ALpram 1, the value

/ e .

Scanned with CamScanner
F— S — - TS G A

h 270 Advanced Microeconomics

. (A) (B)

—~ Good Y
]—Q Good Y AR=MR AR=MR
I /]

ey >X >X
i 6 Q Q o L Q*  Q i
'I:;‘) Good X Good X

Figure 7.9

[~y s .

]'-‘J The two situations are explained in figure 7.9, panel (A) and (B). Panel (A) is meant for

external economies and panel (B) for external diseconomies. The revenue curves are hornizontal, AR =

; __o MR as there is perfect competition in the market. In panel (A) by equalizing private marginal cost

with private marginal benefit only OQp quantity 1s produced. But, if social benefits are included

-~ (SMS), then the ideal output is OQ*. It means that less quantity is produced than the ideal if external

I-O economy prevails. In panel (B) by equalizing private marginal cost with private marginal benefit,

OQp quantity is produced. But, the ideal output, based on social cost and social benefit should be only

I:Q 0Q*. Thus, presence of external diseconomies creates a situation, where the actual quantity produced
is more than the Paretian optimal output. -

- The whole economy can be explained with the help of a figure (see figure 7.1). In figure 7.1,
the economy’s ideal output (Pareto-optimal) is fixed at point E. But, for external economies,
equilibrium will be reached at point A, where the quantity of commodity X produced is less than the
ro ideal output. If there is external diseconomies, more of commodity X is produced and the equilibrium
point is B. Hence, reallocation 1s necessary to satisfy the optimal condition.
|

For optimality, the marginal social cost must be equal to marginal social benefit.
Symbolically, MSC = MSB. In a multi-product economy, equality must be maintained for all the
i "*Q commodities produced. Symbolically, -

MsSB, MSB, _MSB, _,
[' MSC, MSCy MSC,
T:”g But, in the real world because of the presence of externalities this condition may not be
satisfied and so there is divergence between the ideal and the actual output.

—“g 7.6.2.3 Decreasing and Increasing Returns to scale

Ideal output is reached 1f constant returns to scale operates in the cconomy. But, if decreasing

]"Q and increasing returns occur, then there will be some problems. Problems will be less for decreasing
returns to scale than increasing returns to scale. Suppose, therc are two firms producing a commodity

P by using only one factor, labour for reaching the 1deal output point, the marginal product of labour in

Scanned with CamScanner

N il B B A o o W o QYW =~ WS

Welfare Economics . ! 271

the two firms must be equal. It can be easily adjusted and the total product will be completely
exhausted if there 15 constant retums-to-scale. On (he other hand, both decreasmg returms and
increasing returns create non-optmality prob'

In the case of decreasing returns, the tota) payment made 13 lower than the total imcoms or
total value of output produced In other words, total product 13 not exhausted by factor payments
Thus, there is a distnbutional problem in a general equ:l:brrum frame work. However, of 5 pot a
serious problem but requires only tedious mathematical calculations as we miroduce non-lmeznty

On the other hand, increasing returns to scale creates not anly distnbutional problems but 2lso
equality problems because long-run marginal cost curve 13 below long-nun averags cost curve and
product transformation curve is convex 10 the ongin =stead of comcave to the origim. As we know, if
LAC 1s above LMC, the firm incurs loss. The firm has to cq_'x zz MC with MP and 23 AC 13 above
MC the firm has to incur loss always. It finally leads to the collapse of the whole ra-ket symem. Usless
the loss mcurred by firms is covered by government subsidies, such an owput will not be procduced. If
subsidy 1s given, the government will have to seek for additional sources cf revernue to pay te
subsidy. But, 1n a competitve market it 1s almost impossible. This smuation leads to dmurbance ©©
the Pareto-optimality and thereby, to the overall efficiency

There will be no problem, if we have an unmmportant increasing reterns-to-scale. Buy, of e
increasing returns to scale is strong, the production possibility curve will be convex to the cngm as
given in figure 7.10. However, two situanons arise, viz.,

(1) The curvature of the community indifference curve is greater than the curvense of e
convex producuon possibility curve and

(11) The curvature of the PPC s greater than the curva:urv of the mdifference curve

YA Ya
P
()
L
E

L .

o M T
Flgure 7. 10 .

In panel (/\) of figure 7.10, E 15 the cqulhbrmm pon.m where the xsovnlu--pmdun Ln' LM, the -~
production possibility curve PT and th¢ community indifference curve lo, afe tangent  Here, !hc
maximum social welfare 1s no longer assocn:ncd with maximum value ¢f gutput. Atpomnt E. the va'es

Scanned with CamScanner
272 Adyanced Microeconomics

; P
of output is at the minimum. Given % the value of output will be maximized at either P or T.

Thus, in this situation, the social welfare is maximized but 1t is possible to get only a minimum value
of output.

In panel (B) at the point of tangency E, both the social welfare and the value of output are
minimum. Welfare maximization is attained only at point P, where the highest possible community
indifference curve I,, meets the PPC curve PT.

7.6.2.4 Uncertainty

Another reason for inability to obtain optimum welfare is uncertainty. Doubts arise about the
efficiency of competition when there is uncertainty. What is meant by uncertainty? It is nothing but
an economic state of affairs, where people don’t know precisely about the consequences of their
actions. In competitive market. we assume, that there is certainty and every one knows everything in
the market as well as in the matters related to production activities. It means, that there is perfect
knowledge about the market, both supply and demand and the consequences of every action
undertaken. The next question that anses is, whether there is uncertainty and whether markets will
break-down. The answer i1s simply no because the nisk related to uncertainty can be reduced or
climinated. If there is risk, then there will be possibility for trading off the risk by, selling insurance to
cach other. The first Welfare Theorem tells that as long as a competitive insurance market exists,
individuals bear nsk in Pareto-efficient amounts. Another method to reduce risk is diversification.
Any project’s risk can be reduced by issuing shares and thereby diversifying the risk of one person to
a large number of individuals. The stock market allows people to trade risk with one another,
allowing a Pareto-efficient allocation of risk. Thus, the presence of uncertainty does not diminish the
ability of competitive market in the efficient allocation of resources.

7.6.2.5 Non-existence and Incomplete Markets -

The next assumption made by economists related to maximization of welfare is that there is
market for every commodity and the market is complete. If there is perfect market, then it will be
ecasier to fulfil all the three marginal condrtions of Pareto. But, if a market for a commodity does not
exist, we cannot expect the market to do the function of efficient allpcation. In reality, markets for
certain commodities are not in operation. The best example is market for insurance. Though
insurance is a very important commodity, in the world of uncertainty, we cannot purchase insurance
against certain events. It is not possible to purchase insurance against becoming poor. No insurance
firm is ready to supply poverty insurance. If the insurance is supplied, the policy owner will decide
not to work hard and hence the insurance company will have to monitor him. Monitoring is very
difficult or impossible and so there is no market for poverty insurance. It means that if there is no
market, then there will be no possibihty for efficient allocation. On the basis this principle only it is
inferred that maximum social welfare is not possible in the socialist economy where market does not
do the allocation function.

Another reason for the failure to obtain maximum welfare is incomplete market or incomplete
information - one party in a transaction has information that is not available to another. It is called
asymmetric information. Asymmetric information is not good for the thriving of private markets.
Lack of information or incomplete information certainly affects resource allocation  Unless one
knows exactly all details about the product he cannot maximize his wclfart The details about

asymmetric information are discussed in chapter 9. '

Scanned with CamScanner
-
Welfare Economics . ) 23 %
7.6.2.6 Public Goods ’T 1

Another cause of market failure i3 the exstence of public goods. Exstence of pubhic goods [ )
results in the non-attainment of Pareto-optimality, under perfest competition. A public good is one, r'-
whose consumption by one individual does not reduce 1ts utility to any other individual. In other o "‘
words, a good 1s considered to be a public good. if 1ts use by an individual person or firm does not prece.
reduce 1ts usage by other individuals or firms. For example, a brecze in the sea-shore  The tradrtional I ‘
example is the light from the hight house. [ts use by one shrp does not reduce the amount of hight &
available to other ships. Simply, consumption of a pubhic good 15 mon-rival i pature Another ¢
character of public goods is that they are not subject to the exclusion principle or pon-excludability - !
Exclusion principle refers to a system where those who have not paid are excluded from the g
enjoyment of the service. But, public goods are oot subject to the exclusion principle, which means
that their benefits are available to all, irespective of whether they pay for them or not. In other words, G
in the case of public goods, the exclusion of non-payers from the benefits 1s unpossibie and 1n some -
cases extremely costly For example, collecting money from the ship owners, who make use of the
light from light house, is impossible but money can be collected from the persons who use the bndge 6?;
by establishing a toll gate.

If individuals can enjoy the benefit of a public good, without paying for it, they have every a
incentive to nde free. A free rider is one who dertves or gets benefits of a commodity or a service
without paying for it. When everyone tries for a free nde it will result 1n imbalance and market ‘
farlure. Even 1f 1t 1s possible to exclude non-payers, it 1s not possible to reach the Parcto-optimality .

point.

7.6.2.7 Indivisibilities ,'
The Pareto optimality 1s based on the assumption of complete divisibility of products and &.“_,‘_ |

factors. In reality, they are not perfectly or infinitely divisible. In the production wprld, there are T '

small firms and large firms. The economy has arttained the equality of the MRPT and the MRS of the

two commodities among the consumers. In this situaton, the three marginal conditions of Parcto o~

optimality are fulfilled. But, the usc-of resources 15 mefficient and social welfare 1s not maxurmzed - |

due to the indivisibility of producuon methods and factors of production. The small firms cannot take .

advantage ot the lower cost of the large-scale production techmiques. Large firms produce a greater p .

amount of output with the same amount of resources and small firms produce less output with the [

same amount of resources because of mapplicability of the large-scale production techniques. i, @ ’

Thus, Pareto optimality is not possible to attain when —
(1)  there is market power - - . o
(i)  there are externalities in production and in éonsump(ion
(iii)  there are strong econpmies of scale which result in convexity ia the PPC
(iv)  there is uncertainty »
(v)  there is ng market or mq-ompic(e market .- A
(vi)  there are public goods. and B :

. (vii)  there are indivisibilitics in the pro.duclion function’

Scanned with CamScanner
O

RAN T W TTAN STV A

» 274 _ Advanced Microeconomics

-

LLevb

/

ERRERK

d |

1
¢ v

¢l

7.7 Theory of Second Best

The theory of Second Best was propounded by R.G. Lipsey and Kelvin Lancaster (1956). So
it i1s also called Lipsey Lancaster theorem. The theory says that if a constraint operates in the
economy in the path of fulfilling the Pareto optimal conditions and the constraint cannot be overcome,
then the best policy for social welfare maximization is to deviate from the optimal conditions, without
fulfilling the remaining conditions. If all the Paretian optimality conditions are satisfied, then it will
be the first best solution. But, in reality it is not possible as one or more of the Paretian marginal
conditions cannot be satistied due to some political, social or economic constraints. If that is the real
situation, then maximization of social welfare is unattainable. As the first best solution is not possible,
it is better to search for the second best solution. This 1s the gist of the theory of Second Best.

The economists have the view that when some constraints are operating in the economy, it is
not necessary that the satisfaction of the remaining Pareto marginal conditions, improves social
welfare. In other words, the theory states that if one or more of the first order conditions cannot be
satisfied because of the presence of some constraints, it is neither necessary nor desirable to satisfy the
remaining conditions. Simply, social welfare can be maximized by deviating from Pareto optimality
conditions. By looking into the figure 7.11, one can easily understand the first best solution and the
second best solution. Even if it is not possible to reach the ideal output or ideal consumption, it will
be possible to know where to reach, to maximize the social welfare.

In the absence of any constraint, the Y4
first best solunion in the figure 7.11 is E*,
where the society’s welfare 1s maximized.
The highest possible indifference curve is I
A constraint operates in the form of income
line or budget line LM. In this situation, it is
not possible to reach the maximum
indifference curve 1. Hence, it i1s better to
move inside the PPC curve PT. The Paretian
optimality conditions are, not, satisfied at the
point a, and the social welfare attained 1s
shown by the community indifference curve
I,. But, the social welfare at point E; is more
than at the point a, because the welfare
attained at point E; 1s represented by I,,
which lies above Ip. Simply, the welfare

N

Good Y

level at point E;, where Pareto optimality Good X
conditions are not satisfied i1s more than at
point a, where other but not all, Pareto Figure 7.11

opumality conditions are satisfied. Hence, it

1s true that it 1s not necessary to try to fulfil other marginal conditions, if there are some constraints in
achieving the first best solution

Now, take an example to explain this situation. In the economy, two goods "X’ and ‘Y” are
produced. Commodity X is produced under monopoly conditions and the market for commodity Y is
perfectly competiine.  Here, monopoly acts as a constraint in the way of ataining Paretian
equilibrium. In such a situation, it1s good to the economy, maximizing social welfare to deviate more
2nd more from perfect competition, in the rest of the economy. An attempt 1o ensure the fulfilment of

Scanned with CamScanner

- 4 I I S i/ SN AL A E. S B T N\ W

Welfare Economics ) . 275

Pareto optimal conditions causes a fall in social welfare. It is based on the argument that «f one
commodity 1s produced by monopolist and another by a perfectly competiive producer then there 1s
deviauon between MRS and MRTS (MRS > MRTS). Hence, an efficient output 1s not produced and
allocation of resources is not optimal. But, 1f both the commoditics are produced under monopoly
condition, then there will be a possibility for reaching the equality conditior, i.e., MRS = MRTS

7.8 Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem

The social welfare function developed by Bergson 1s a method for finding out the social
welfare from individuals® welfare. The function tries to arrive at a social ordering of feasible social
states from individuals’ ranking of these social states in terms of their desirability. The social renking
of alternative economic situations can be made only by making interpersonal compansons of utility.
Kenneth J. Arrow in his book ‘Social Choice and Individual Values' (1951) states that even if
individual preference ranking or ordering, satisfies the property of consistency, it may not give us a
consistent ranking for social preference. A consistent social ranking of economic situations may not
exist, even if one uses the democratic principles of majority voting. Simply saying, there is
impossibility of obtaining the social welfare function even if individual preferences are consistent. He
suggests seven minimum conditions or cniteria, which social choices must satisfy in order to reflect
preferences of individuals.

) Completeness: The social ranking must rank all feasible economic situations.

(ii) Consistent: The social ranking must be consistent Consistency refers to the
requirement that individuals have preferences that are fully defined, 1e., every
alternative is ranked in relation to every other. .

(iii) Transitivity: The ranking must be transitive. In other words, soc:al choices mest
satisfy the condition of transifivity. 1f a socicty prefers X to Y and Y to Z, then the
society must prefer X to Z. The social preferences are commpletely ordered.

(iv) Responsiveness: Social choices must be directly related to mdividual preference, LC..
social choices must change in the same direction as individual choices. In other worn
the social ranking must be b:sed on individual preferences and must respond xo
individual’s preferences.

(v) Non-dictation: The social mni:ing must not be imposad or dictated. It should not be
imposed by one individual within the society as it depends on individua! preferences.

(vi) Non-imposition: The social ranking must not be imposed by customs or forces from
outside the society but derived from individual preferences. -

(vii) Independence of Irrelevant Altermatives: If any one.altémative is excluded, 1 will
not affect the ranking of the other alternatives. .

A social welfare function exists only when the zbove mentioned axioms are fulfilled
simultaneously. Arrow demonstrates that it is not possible to sausfy all these conditions but there is
good chance for getting at least one condition violated. - It is very difficult to"obtain 2 transitne social
choice for each set of individual preferences,” without violating at least one condinon. It is said that
social choice is inconsistent or undemecratic. This view has tome to be known as the Amow's

Impossibility Theorem. £ = . -

Scanned with CamScanner
i B 2 oV 028% . o0\

276 Advanced Microeconomics

The following example shows that such a all conditions-fulfilled social welfare function may
not exist. Suppose, an economy consists of 3 individuals A, B and C and there are three alternative
states of affairs X, Y and Z. The individuals’ rankings are as follows.

A - X>Y>Z
B —» Y>Z>X
C - Z>X>Y

It can now be numerically denoted by assigning 3 for their first choice, 2 for second choice
and 1 for third rank.

Table 7.1: Individual Preference

. Alternative
Individuals X Y Z
A 3 2 1
B 1 3 2
C 2 3
The table 7.1 and the figure 7.12 show that A YA )

prefers X to Y to Z and B prefers Y to Z to X
and C prefers Z to X to Y and each individual
has consistent preference. But, the majority
voung in a democratic state leads to 3
intransitive social patterns. A and C prefer X
to Y, A and B prefer Y to Z and B and C
prefer Z to X. All the three alternatives X, Y 2 B
& Z are preferred by two of the three
individuals. This inference is known from the
multi-peaked pattern of the curves indicating
individuals® preference. It is very clear, that a 1 A
democratic voting system has not given any
equilibrium. It can easily be inferred that the
democratic process of ranking leads to a o
contradictory welfare situation. This is called (o) X Y Z >X

\ voting paradox. The voting paradox arrives Alternatives

whenever individual preference are not single

peaked

7.8.1 Criticisms

' Ranks

Figure 7.12
Arrow’s impossibility theory is also not free from limitations. The important limitations are
as follows:

Arrow talks only about democratic voting, but fails to talk about a system where there is
permission for buying and selling of votes as well as for taking a unanimous decision.

Scanned with CamScanner
RN\ /U W WA VLA M LS
Welfare Economics . o 277 ﬁcw

e Armow's way of explaining the mt;dcl is also very seriously criticized. It is nothing buta - ;,.r
theorem of mathematical politics. ) i
[

e  Another limitation of Arrow’s theorem is that it is only a theorem of decision-making
rather than a theorem of social welfare maximization. : ;
o

e Arrow's theorem is also not free from value judgements or inter-personal comparisons.
8! P

-
7.9 Rawl’s Theory of Justice - 9

Ly

John Rawl, known mainly for his’theory of justice, is one of the most important political - §
philosophers of the second half of the 20" century. His theory of Justice as faimess or simply theory o 4
of justice, develops principles of justices to govern a modem social order. He has put fom’an_‘lAhls e
ideas on social justice first in the book ‘A Theory of Justice” (1971), then 1n his second book ‘Political y
Liberation’ (1996) and at last in the book ‘Justice s Faimness: A Restatement’ (2001). The theory of 5““ .
justice provides a framework that explains the significance of political and personal liberties, of equal e)
opportunity and cooperative arrangements that benefit more the less advantaged persons of society.
Darrel Moellendorf considers Rawl's conception of justice as an associational conception because o
Rawl's initial concern with justice is related to relationship between persons within an association é
(society). There is a system of cooperation over time, from one generation to another. The membpers ;.
of the society enter into the relation when they are born and exit from it only at death. ?

Rawl developed a conception of justice from the perspective that persons are free and equal. a, p—
Their freedom consists in their possession of two moral powers namely — (i) a capacity for a sense of ) (
justice and (ii) a capacity for a conception of good. A sense of justice refers to the individual’s '
capacity to understand, to apply and to act from the public conception of justice. This sense indicates 6'_:"ﬂ
the willingness of individuals to act in relation to others. A conception of good is a conception of '
what 1s valuable in human life. Persons have the above mentioned two moral powers and so they are G p—
responsible for their actions. This is called political conception. -

A political conception of justice involves three ideas, the original positiorL the veil of 5 -
ignorance and the derivation of two principles of justice. Rawl, further, assumes that all ciuzens are ) ?
reasonable in their behaviour. They are prepared to offer one another fair terms of social cooperation.

They also agree to act on these terms, sometimes at the cost of their own interest, provided that others -
also accept these terms. They do this freely and aré not dominated or manipulated by or-under the ' ‘
pressure of an inferior political or social position. Rawl calls thus the criterion of reciprocity. They G.

also recognize and are willing to bear the consequences of the burden of judgement. They also affirm T '

the reasonable comprehensive doctrines. Rawl notes three features of the doctrine. They are, (1) it
covers the major religious, philosophical and moral aspects of human life, an exeroise of theoretical ‘- -
reason, (ii) it determines the values, to reard as highly significant arid how to weigh them against i .
each other when they conflict, an exercise of practical reason and (iii) it evolves over time in the light ‘
of what it sees as good and sufficient reason. Reasonable persons allow others freedom to explore B L 7
religious and spiritual options even if these options differ from their own. : I
@
w

7.9.1 Theory of Justice ’ . . A ‘- &

terms of efficiency effect, by completely: 'ryeglccting equity or distributive justic®. The separation of
efficiency and equity considerations in decisioh-making presumes that there isAaI\va)s a conflict
between the objective of efficiency-and the goal of equity. But, in many situations, by mmproving
. efficiency in the use of resources, equity .can also be improved and ‘an’improvemen in equity also

All criteria of Pareto, Kaldor ard Hiéks and_Scito(sky, analyse the c(;xfct"pl of welfare m‘_i

Scanned with CamScanner
