Department ol Economics
Jahangirnagar University
M.Sc. Final Examination 2023
Course No: 501 (Advanced Microcconomic Theory)
Full Marks: 70 Time: Four Hours
Answer any five of the following questions.
All parts of a question mustbe answered consecutively

1. a) Assume there are only two goods. X. and ¥ Prove that quasi-concave utility U (X, V) is
identical to AMRS/dX < 0 &)

b) Afler grading exams, your instructor only obtains utility from his favorite cocktail- the Negrom.

Each Negroni consists of | ounce of Gin. | ounce of red Vermouth, and | ounce of Campari. Let

G stand for ounces of Gin, I' stands for ounces of Vermouth, and C stands for ounces of Campari.

Each good also has a pricc denoted by £y, P, and £, respectively.

i) Write your instructor's utility function. ()
i) Find his Marshallian demand for Gin. (2)
iii) Find his Hicksian demand for Campari ()
iv) Find the expenditure function ()

¢) U =X + In (Y). Find the demands for X and Y. Suppose you only have /¢ Which goods do
you buy? Why? (3)

2. 2) A person’s preferences are presented by the utility function U= X + log(Y) (as always, the log
is the base e or natural log). Does this person have convex indifference curves? Provide proof.

_ 2)
b) The following is the log of an individual s demand for good X as a function of prices and income

X(Po, P, P, 1) = aPEPLR) I
i) What is the cross-price elasticity with good 2? (2)
For parts ii. iii, and iv, use the following values for the parameters:
a=-05;y=04:6=08
ii) What is income elasticity? Is X a luxury, necessity, or an inferior good? (2)
iii) Is good Z a gross substitute or a gross complement for good X7 ()
iv) If the price of ¥ were to fall by 5%, by what percent and in what direction would the quantity
demanded of X change? )
v) If the price of good X decreases, would this person’s expenditure on X increase, decrease. or
remain the same? ()
¢) An agent has preferences for goods X and ¥ represented by the utility function
UXY)=X+3Y

The price of good X is P, = 20. the price of good ¥'is P, = 40, and her income is [ = 400.

Choose the quantitics of X and Y that maximize her utility for the given prices and income.

@)

Page 1 of 4

(%] CamScanner


3 a) You are hired by Burger King to estimate the demand for its Whopper sandwich. Initially,
you choose a very simple demand function, and the following estimate

| Q =10 + 1.3P, + 0.4Py, — 3P, + 221

Where, Q is the quantity of Whoppers (in thousands), P, is the price of a Whopper, Py, is the
price of a McDonald’s Big Mac (McDonald’s is Burger King’s largest competitor), Py is the price
of an order of French fries at Burger King (all prices are in $’s), and I is the average income of the

region (in thousands of $’s).
i) You notice immediately that there is a terrible problem with thig estimate. What is the problem?

2)
b) To correct the problem, you change the structural form of your demand function and add one
additional variable. The correctly estimated demand function is:

Where, O, B, and I are defined as before, P,,, and Py, are the prices of related goods (in
$’s), and 4 is advertising expenditure (in thousands of $’s). Use this correct demand function to
answer the following questions.

1) As before, the two related goods are McDonald’s Big Macs and Burger King French fries. Which
related good (i.e., r1 or r2) is French ’fries? ()
ii) Is the'Burger King Whooper a luxury, necessity, or inferior good? 2)
iii) Suppose. Burger King increases its advertising expenditure by 50%. By what percentage and
in what direction will the demand for Whoppers change? 2)
iv) Burger King decides to lower the price of its French fries by 50%. By what percentage and in
what direction (i.e., increase or decrease) will the quantity of Whoppers sold change? 2)
v) Suppose the marginal cost of making a Whopper is $1.00. What is the profit-maximizing price
of a Whopper? ‘ (2)
vi) McDonald’s runs a sale and lowers its price of Big Macs by 10%. By what percentage must

Burger King lower its price to not lose any customers. 2)

3. a) Below are intuitive explanations of four properties of cost functions. Please write the formal
mathematical property next to the correct intuitive explanation. You can use w; and [; to represent
generic input prices and inputs, respectively.
iS If all prices increase, the cost of producing a given output level must increase. (1.5)
ii) If all prices increase by the same proportion, costs must increase by that same proportion. (1.5)
iii) If prices increase but relative prices change, the input mixture will change, and costs will not
go up by as much as they would if the input mix remained the same. (1.5)

iv) If it costs more to make more. (1.5)

b) A sausage maker uses three ounces of pork and two ounces of veal to make one 5-ounce*sausage.

He pays 30 cents for an ounce of pork and 80 cents for an ounce of veal.

Page 2 of 4

CamScanner


i) Let P stand for ounces of pork, ¥ stands for ounces o ¢ veal, and S stands for a number of sausages

Write the production function for sausages. Q)

ii) Find the conditional factor demand for pork. 2)

iii) What is the cost function for sausages? )

iv) Suppose the demand for sausages is given PY Q = 200P=6. What is the profit-maximizing

price to charge for sausages? &

5. a) A firm's technology is represented by the production function Q = (K L)l/ .

In the short run, K is fixed at K = 64 = 43
i) What is the firm's short-run production function? 1)
ii) Find the short-run conditional factor demand for 7. (1)
iii) What is the short-run cost function? )
iv) What is the shutdown price? (1)
v) Assume the firm is a price taker in output (let P be the output price). Find the firm’s short-run
supply. (M
Assume now we are in the long run, and X is no longer fixed

vi) What are the returns to scale for this production function? €))
vii) Calculate the elasticity of substitution O. m
viii) Find the long-run conditional factor demands for L and K. (1)
ix) Find the long-run cost function. 7 )]
x) Again, assuming the firm is a price taker, find the long-run supply. @))]

b) Starbucks decides to introduce a new “Jumbo” iced tea, which will come in a 62-ounce cup.

The current Trenta cup holds 31 ounces. Will the Jumbo Cup cost twice as much, more than twice

as much, or less than twice as much as the Trenta Cup? Please explain why you chose your answer.

- 4)
6. a) A competitive industry consists of 1,000 identical firms, each with short-run total costs
given by Csr(g) = 0.5¢° + 2q + 80.
i) What is the short-run supply for each firm? €))
ii) What is the industry short-run supply? (1)
' ~ Suppose market demand is O = 44,000 — 1000P
iii) Find the equilibrium price and quantity. 2
iv) What is each firm’s short-run profit? )
v) Suppose the government adds a $20 per unit tax. Find the new equilibrium price demanders
pay, the price suppliers keep, and the quantity produced. )
vi) Calculate the welfare cost of the tax. )

Page 3 of 4

(%] CamScanner


b) In a three-good world, the excess demand for good 2 i given by

P, 2P

and the excess demand for good 3 is given by

P, 4P
Z3(P) =3-E+ P,
' )
) Find the excess demand function for good 1.
. P; P P, 3
i) What arc the market-clearing price ratios P—z, , = and 29 ( )
1 Pg P2
7. The domestic demand for color printers is Q = 250,000 — 100P. The domestic supply is
Q = 250P - 30,000
a) Suppose no international trade takes place. Find the domestic autarky price and quantity. )

b) Suppose this country can import or export as many printers as it wants at the world price of

P\, =600. Would the country import or export 'prin'ters? How many would it import/export under
Bentct

free trade? 3)

c) Suppose the domestic governmentputs a tariff of $50 per imported printer. What would be the
new market equilibrium (i.e., P; domestic g4 and qs; and imports)? How much tariff revenue

would the government gain? 3

d) Assuming that supply = MC, what are the welfare effects of the tariff (i.e., ACS; APS; AW)?

| ©)
e) Assume instead that the exporting nation signs a Voluntary Export Restraint with the domestic
govemment- that limits exportsto 20,000 printers. Find the welfare effects of the VER as compared
to free trade. 3)

8. a) Explain Hicks-Kaldor compensation principle of attaining social welfare. How did Scitovski

correct the contradiction arises in this principle. (6)

b) Derive the grand utility possibility frontier and determine the ‘point of bliss’. Does such point

ensure maximum social welfare? Justify your explanation. - ®)

Page 4 of 4

(%] CamScanner


1.

Department of Economics
Jahangimagar University
M.Sc. Final Examination 2023
Course No: 502 (Advanced Macroeconomic Theory)
Full Marks: 70 Time: Four Hours

Answer any five of the following questions.
All parts of a question must he answered consecutively.

Solow model focuses on four variables like output (Y), capital (K), labor (L) and knowledge [4+3+3+4]

or “effectiveness of labor” (A). The growth rat€ of X r /X ;

growth rate of A is g and caéit;)il depregciation rate js §, R sl e ar i/l

a) Briefly discuss the assumptions about input. output and production function to construct
SOIOW_ exogenous growth mpdel. What is the production function of capital augmenting
and Hicks-neutral technological progress? E

b) Brieflv—describe the dynamics of k (cap.ilal_) Why docs it is called the Balanced Growth
Path (BGP)?

¢) Describe how each of the following affects the break-even and actual investment in the
basic diagram for the Solow model:

i) Increase in the rate of capital depreciation.
ii)  Improvement in the rate of technological progress.
iii)  Capital’s share (a) rises for an intensive form of production function.

d) Show the impacts of savings ratio in the steady state solution of Solow growth model and
prove that exogenous changes in the savings ratio leave only level effects on k and y, but
not on growth effects.

In the Romer model of endogenous technological progress, the process of technological

progress is given by A = A0.5LR, where LR is the share of researchers in the population. The

population grows at the rate n.

a) Find the steady state level of technological progress. Suppose that LR will increase by 10%
(increased by 1.1 times).

b) Calculate the effect of this change on technological progress at the moment of shock (on
impact).

¢) Calculate its effect on the steady state level of technological progress.

d) Illustrate your answers on the main diagram of the model (g# on the horizontal axis,

g*/9%on the vertical axis.

Consider a Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans model with the production function ¥ = F(K, AL) and
real interest rate r; household’s utility function takes the form
U=[2 e Ptu(c(®) <2t
and the instantaneous utility function takes the CRRA (constant. —relative —risk-aversion)
1-6
utility form U(ct) = %—;Where 0 determine the household’s willingness to shift
consumption between different periods.
a) Define Euler equation. Find out the Euler equation for households” maximization problem
and interpret it.
b) Describe the phase diagram in terms of the evolution of ¢ and k.
c¢) What is the difference between the balanced grewth paths of the Solow and Ramsey—
Cass—Koopmans on social optimum and the golden-rule level of capital?
d) Determine the slope of the saddle path using [aylor approximation and the rate of

adjustment.
Suppose Y; = F (K, ALi), with having constant returns to scale and the intensive form of the
production function satisfying the Inada conditions. Again, Awi = (1+ g) Ay, Lii = (1+n) L,
and ki+1 = Li (WA(- C1). Assume time is discrete rather than continuous and each individual
lives for only two periods.

a) Solve the individual’s maximization problem where 6 determines how much individuals
varies in response to diflcrences between r (real rate of return) and p (discount rate).
b) Find the speed-of convergence of k to k. How does it differ from 8olow model?
c) Describe how each of the following affects ki as a function of k;:
(i) A rise in n.
(ii) A fall in p.
d) After relaxing the assumptions of logarithmic utility and Cobb-D i
are the possibilities for the relationship between k and ks ? Is ‘t)llllfr]:s aI:'OdUCU.OI.L.What
dynamic inefficiency? ' ¥ possibility of

[4+4+3+3]

[4+4+2+4]

[4+3+2+5)

(%] CamScanner


Consider a simplified version of the models of R&D and growth model developed by P.Romer [2+4+ - y
(1990), Gross and Helpman (1991) and Aghion and Howitt (1992) where 0 reflects the effect ‘
of the existing stock of knowledge on the success of R&D and B is a shift parameter. Both the

goods producing sector and R&D producing sector use the full stock of knowledge A.

a) Cntlcally explain the role of a;. (the labor force uscd in the R&D Sector) for the dynamics
of knowledge accumulation without considering capital into the model. Is there any long-
run growth effect for change in a.?

b) Assume that § + B <1 and n > 0, and that the economy is on its balanced growth path.
Describe how each of the following changes affects the ga = 0 and gk= 0 lines and the
position of the economy in (g4, gk) space at the moment of the change:

(i) A decrease in n.
(i) An increase in a.

¢) There are two cases p+0<1 or p+0=1 and n=0; What is the difference on the dynamics of
the growth rates of capital and knowledge between these two cases?

d) Briefly explain the nature of Knowledge and the determinants of the allocation of resources
to R & D including Léarning by Doing.

Suppose firm i’s output is Y = [Lio L(i)?di] " and L(i) is used to denote both the quantity of [3+5+3+3]

labor devoted to producing input i and the quantity of input i that goes into final-goods

production. Individual’s discount rate is p and their instantaneous utility function is
logarithmic. The utility of the representative household takes the constant-relative-risk
aversion (CRRA) form is % = it;;p and 0 is the coefficient of the relative risk aversion.

Knowledge creation, % = BL, .Growth rate of the wage equals the growth rate of output.

Population growth is zero.

a) Briefly discuss the assumptions to construct the model.

b) How long-run growth will be determined by using the present value of profits from the
discovery of a new idea at time t? What will be the equilibrium value of L » ‘

c) What will be the socially optimal level of La> Explain how it is different from the
equilibrium level of La

d) Briefly explain the implications of this model and extensions of this modet. —

Consider the infinitely lived representative household that derives utility from both [3+2+4+5]
consumption (c;) and leisure (1-1i). The production function of the representative firm is given
by '
Sk b, z)= z ki 1
Z+1= @ Zrt €
where z is the productivity parameter and € is a white noise error term.

a) Construct the household’s problem and using log utility derive the short-run labor supply
curve. Explain the relationship among leisure, real wage, and interest rate.

b) Prove that long run labor supply is independent of wage when (p=%

c) Find the elasticity of labor supply and interpret it.

d) Discuss Hansen’s indivisible labor supply solution as an attempt to overcome the
limitations of previous model andcalibratios mechanism.

The representative producer of good i has production function Q=L utility depends on [4+3+4+3]
coasumption and Labor effort where P is known as perfect information. z; (good specific
shock) and m (monetary shock) are normally distributed. Conditional expectation is a linear
equation. On the other hand,

For representative consumer C,= o (r(—p) Ciand Wicksellian interest rate

"= p+0°'g. According to Yun (1996) Optimal price vi is

Vi =pi+Q f:o[(vs —Ps) +1xs ]e—(a+p)(s—t)ds

and k = a’n; where 1 is sensitivity parameter.

a) Explain the role of rational expectation in dete:mining the effectiveness of macro policy
when there is imperfect information by using L -cas” supply curve.

b) Define New Keynesian DSGE model. Determine the new Keynesian IS equation for
continuous time. S

c) Determine new Keynesian PC curve for continuous time using Leibniz’s rule. Explain
“divine coincidence” according to Blanchard and Gali.

d) Describe Taylor rule in the canonical New Keynesian model where x (output) and 7
(inflation) both are jump variables.

(%] CamScanner


0
%.

7
7
&

T
N

1. a)
b)

c)

d)

b)

c)

Department of Economics
Jahangirnagar University
M.Sc. Final Examination 2023
Course No: 503 (Pevelopment Economics)
Full Marks: 70 Time: Four Hours
Answer any five of the following questions.

What is endogeneity in regression analysis. and how does it arise?

Suppose you are cstimating the effect of health on labor market outcomes with the
rescarch question: "Does better health improve an individual's labor market productivity
(c.g., employment status or income)?"

(1) Explain how health could be an endogenous variable in this context.

(i) Explain how the Instrumental Variables (IV) method can be used to address and
resolve the endogencity problem in estimating the effect of health on labor market
outcomes.

Suppose you are cxamining the relationship between health and income across different

points of the income distribution.

(i) ~ Why might ordinary least squares (OLS) regression be inadcquate in capturing
this relationship?

(ii) What is Quantile Regression? How can quantile regression provide deeper insights
into the impact of health on income across different income levels?

What is Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA), and how is it used to examine the

relationship between two sets of variables?

Compare the logit and probit models in binary outcome analysis. What arc their key
similarities and differences?

In what situations is the multinomial logit model more appropriate than the binary logit
model? Explain.

Answer the following questions: '

(1) A logit regression estimates the impact of cducation and cxperience on the
probability of being employed. The coefficient of education is 0.5. Interpret this
coefficient. What docs it imply about the rclationship between education and
cmployment probability?

(1) In the same logit regression model, the odds ratio for expericnce is estimated to
be 1.7. Interpret this odds ratio.

(iii)  Ina probit model, the marginal effect of income on the probability of owning a
house is 0.12. What does this marginal effcct mean?

(iv)  Inamultinomial logit model analyzing employment status, the outcome variable
has three categories: Employed, Sclf-employed, and Unemployed (used as the
base category). The estimated coefficient for "Male" in the "Sclf-employed"
category is 1.2. Interpret this coefficient in the context of the model. Also,
calculate and interpret the corresponding odds ratio.

(%] CamScanner


By

b)

<)

a)

b)

<)

a)
b)

c)

b)
c)

d)

a)
b)
c)
d)

a)
b)

c)

What do you mean by autoregressive and distributed lag model? Explain with examples.
What is the ad hoc approach to estimate distributed lag models? Does this approach have
any limitations?

Describe the kyock approach which is applied to distributed lag models? Is this an
appropriate approach to convert a distributed lag model to an Autoregressive model?

Discuss the potential limitations of the Adaptive Expectations Model and the Partial
Adjustment Model in the context of estimating distributed lag models.

What role does the Instrumental Variables (1V) method play in overcoming the limitations
of estimating Koyck and Adaptive Expectations models? '

Explain the Almon Polynomial Approach to estimating distributed lag models. How does
it differ from the Koyck transformation and other distributed lag models? Discuss the key
assumptions underlying the Almon approach, along with its'advantages and [imitations in
pracfical econometric analysis.

Define stationarity in the context of time series analysis. Why is it important in
econometric modeling?
What is unit root problem? How does the Dickey-Fuller (DF) test help detect the presence
of a unit root in a time series? Explain the testing procedure.
Critically explain the following unit root tests:

1) Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) unit root test

(i)  Phillips-Perron (PP) unit root test, and

(i)  Kwiatkowski—Phillips—Schmidt-Shin (KPSS) unit root test

Why do structural breaks matter in unit root testing? Briefly explain their impact on
standard unit root tests. ’

What is the Zivot-Andrews test for unit root? Describe its procedure and how it accounts
for structural breaks.

What is cointegration in time series analysis? How can we test whether two or more
variables are cointegrated? Explain. ' '
Why might a researcher prefer the ARDL bounds testing approach over the Johansen
cointegration test? Discuss the key differences that guide this choice.

Consider the ARIMA (2,1,1) model. Write down its equation and explain its components
in plain terms.

How does the Box-Jenkins methodology guide the estimation and evaluation of ARIMA
models? Explain briefly.

Suppose you have two variables: inflation and unemployment. How could a VAR model
help you understand their relationship over time? Explain.

Define Granger causality and explain how it can be tested using a VAR model.

What are the advantages of panel data over cross-section and time series data?

What is the Fixed Effect Least-Squares Dummy Variable (LSDV) model in panel data
analysis? Explain how it controls for unobserved heterogeneity and discuss its limitations.
What is the Panel Random Effects Model? How does it differ from the Fixed Effects
Model in terms of assumptions and estimation? When is it appropriate to use the Random
Effects approach?

CamScanner


Department of Economics
Jahangirnagar University
M.Sc. Final Examination 2023
Course No: 507 (Health Economics)
Full Marks: 70 Time: Four Hours
Answer any five of the following questions.
All parts of a question must be answered consecutively
_ What is the difference between affordable care act (ACA) and federal level dependent
‘coverage? According to Da Jung Jun (2023) study, briefly explain the effects of
dependent health insurance coverage mandates on father’s job mobility and
compensation. 14
- “Long Covid significantly impacts productivity losses and provision of informal care,
exacerbated by high national prevalence of long Covid”. Justify this research result in the
light of Kwon et al., (2023) study. 14

. Briefly discuss the Louisiana family planning program (LAFPP). According to Gamino
(2023) study, briefly explain the effect of a free family planning program on fertility. 14

. Is supported employment effective for disability insurance recipients with mental health
conditions? Discuss your answer in the light of Fontenay and Tojerow (2025) studies. 14

. Briefly discuss the effects of the minimum wage on child health, in the light of Wehby et

al., (2022) research. 14
. a) “In a perfect health insurance market, a risk-averse individual will always be willing to
pay full and fair premium for health insurance.” Discuss. 6
b) Show that in case of adverse selection:
i.  Pooling equilibrium is not sustainable 3
ii.  Separating equilibrium is possible only if the proportion of high-risk individual’s
is much lower than the low-risk individual in the pool. .

. How can you define triage of the emergency departments for medical care? Briefly

discuss the importance of the emergency departments and identify the challenges in Eds.
14

. Based on the Holford and Rabe (2024) studies, briefly discuss the impact on children’s
body weight of switching from means-tested to universal provision of nutritious free
school meals. 14

(%] CamScanner


1.

Department of ECQBOm'ics
Jahangirnagar University
M.Sc. Final Examination 2023
Course No: 510 (Labor Economics)
Full Marks: 70 Time: Four Hours
Answer any five of the following questions.

All parts of a question must he answered consecutively

a) Sketch the circular flow diagram to demonstrate the linkage between the labor
market and the mainstream economy. 3]

b) Briefly explain the distinctive features of the labor market which segregate this
market from other types of market. [6)

¢) Why does the employer set work schedules to signify an institutional restraint on
individual choice? — Explain using a diagram. [5]

Suppose an employer pays a specific Wage rate per hour when the total hours worked
in a week are equal to or less than 40 hours. For every extra hour over 40 hours per
week, the wage rate is 2 (two) times the above wage rate. Now use the labor/leisure
model to answer the following questions:
\

a) First, draw a budget constraint for someone earning $10 per hour who receives
$200 a week in non-labor income. What happens to the budget constraint with
overtime laws? [3]

b) Given your answer to (a), draw an indifference curve so that, given the original
budget constraint, the person is working 40 hours per week. What now happens to
hours of work, given the new budget constraint? Again, sketch an indifference curve
to show this. Did work hours increase or decicase due to the overtime Jaw?-Explain
why. [3]

¢) In words, define the income and substitution effects of a wage change. Use
diagram(s) to identify the income and substitution effects. Which one is more robust?

(4]

d) If the wage increases for all hours worked rather than just for those after 40 hours
per week, would the change in hours of work be any different? Again, show this in
the graph and explain why or why not. [4]

a) Data from a recent study indicates that 32% of salaried workers work 45 hours or
more (instead of 40 hours) per week. What can account for this apparent discrepancy
between theory and fact? [7]

b) There is a debate about whether the size of the labor force will expand or contract
during periods of recession and depression. - explain the debate with the help of
added worker effect and discourage worker effect. N

a) “Time and monetary costs associated with working affect the shape of budget
constraint thus influence the number of hours a person chooses to work” — Explain
this statement using appropriate diagrams. (8]

b) Why do policymakers initiate wage subsidy programs? Illustrate the effect of a
wage subsidy program on the labor market. [6]

(%] CamScanner


5. a) How is the equilibrium level of employment determined in the long run? Why is
the long-run labor demand curve more elastic than the short-run labor demand curve?

(7]

b) Despite the revolution in technology in the twentieth century, however, the number
of jobs in the economy has not decreased rather has increased by many millions. How
can this be accounted for? Explain the impact of technological change on
employment with the long-run theory of labor demand. 7

. a) Describe the wage determination model of a monopsony market. Illustrate how the

monopsonist exploits labor. (6]

b) What are the positive and negative aspects of minimum wage law in a competitive
market? [s it possible to obtain competitive cutcomes if the government imposes a
minimum wage law in a monopsony market? [8]

. a) Illustrate the investment decision rules for taking higher education using
age/earnings profile. - = (7]

b) Differentiate between general on-the-job training and specific on-the-job training.
Graphically analyze the benefits and costs of these two training. [7]

. a) How can years of education be used as a good screening device in the employee
selection process? Discuss using diagram(s) the signaling failure and the optimal
signal when education is used as a screening device. (8]

b) Briefly explain different factors that influence the achievement of the external
alignment of pay level. (3]

c) It has been suggested that one way to raise the quality of teaching at colleges and
universities is to link professors’ pay to their classroom performance, say by making
pay raises a positive function of the score [they receive on end-of-semester student
course evaluations. Evaluate the pros and cons of this pay form. [3]

(%] CamScanner
